AGENTOS - A HYBRID MULTI-AGENT RUNTIME
ENVIRONMENT FOR AUTONOMOUS AI
APPLICATIONS
A PROJECT REPORT
Submitted by

GOGUL A (2023115020)
MOHAN VISHNU KUMAR M (2023115026)
OVIYASHREE C J (2023115052)
KUDIMI GUNA SEKHAR (2023115126)
submitted to the Faculty of
INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
in partial fulfillment for the award of the degree
of

BACHELOR OF TECHNOLOGY
in

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING, GUINDY
ANNA UNIVERSITY
CHENNAI 600 025
OCTOBER 2026

ii

ANNA UNIVERSITY
CHENNAI - 600 025
BONA FIDE CERTIFICATE

Certified that this project report titled AgentOS - A Hybrid
Multi-Agent Runtime Environment for Autonomous AI Applications is
the bona fide work of Gogul A (2023115020), Mohan Vishnu Kumar M
(2023115026), Oviyashree C J (2023115052), and Kudimi Guna Sekhar
(2023115126), who carried out the project work under my supervision. Certified
further that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, the work reported herein
does not form part of any other thesis or dissertation on the basis of which a
degree or an award was conferred on an earlier occasion on this or any other
candidate.
PLACE:

DR. SELVI RAVINDRAN

DATE:

ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR
PROJECT GUIDE
DEPARTMENT OF IST, CEG
ANNA UNIVERSITY
CHENNAI 600025
COUNTERSIGNED

DR. P. YOGESH
HEAD OF THE DEPARTMENT
DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING, GUINDY
ANNA UNIVERSITY
CHENNAI 600025

iii

ABSTRACT

Large-language-model applications are evolving from single-turn chat
interfaces into systems that plan, use tools, preserve context, and coordinate
multiple specialised agents. However, application developers commonly rebuild
scheduling, memory, event propagation, execution monitoring, and failure handling
for each project. This report presents AgentOS, a hybrid multi-agent runtime
environment that provides these operating-system-style services around autonomous
AI applications. The implemented system combines a Next.js user interface, a
FastAPI gateway, a Redis-backed event path, MongoDB task history, ChromaDB
semantic retrieval, structured LLM planning, dependency-aware directed acyclic
graph execution, semantic context paging, a global priority-aging scheduler,
token and concurrency admission control, and a sandboxed Python code runner
with bounded self-healing retries. The frontend exposes the generated plan
graph and live scheduler and execution activity through WebSocket updates.
The report distinguishes implemented facilities from proposed components such
as complete role-based access control, distributed locking, hybrid model routing,
and durable coroutine restoration after a kernel restart. Verification is based on
repository compile checks, TypeScript checks, and focused smoke tests rather
than unsubstantiated performance claims. AgentOS therefore provides a modular
foundation for studying reliable, observable, and resource-aware multi-agent
execution.
Keywords: multi-agent systems, agent runtime, LLM planning, DAG
execution, context paging, priority scheduling, Redis, ChromaDB, sandboxed
code execution.

iv

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

We express our sincere gratitude to our project guide, Dr. Selvi
Ravindran, Associate Professor, Department of Information Science and Technology,
Anna University, College of Engineering, Guindy, for her guidance, technical
suggestions, and continuous encouragement throughout this work.
We thank the faculty members and staff of the Department of Information
Science and Technology for providing the academic environment and facilities
required to undertake this project. We also acknowledge our classmates, friends,
and families for their support during the design, implementation, testing, and
documentation of AgentOS.

Gogul A
Mohan Vishnu Kumar M
Oviyashree C J
Kudimi Guna Sekhar

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
LIST OF TABLES
LIST OF FIGURES
LIST OF SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS

iii
iv
vii
viii
ix

1

INTRODUCTION
1.1 BACKGROUND
1.2 MOTIVATION
1.3 PROBLEM STATEMENT
1.4 OBJECTIVES
1.5 SCOPE
1.6 CONTRIBUTIONS
1.7 REPORT ORGANIZATION

1
1
1
2
2
3
3
3

2

LITERATURE SURVEY
2.1 OVERVIEW
2.2 AGENT RUNTIMES AND AUTONOMOUS AGENTS
2.3 MEMORY AND CONTEXT MANAGEMENT
2.4 PLANNING, TOOL USE, AND REFLECTION
2.5 SCHEDULING, RESOURCES, AND RELIABILITY
2.6 SECURITY AND SANDBOXED EXECUTION
2.7 EVENT-DRIVEN INFRASTRUCTURE
2.8 RESEARCH GAP AND POSITIONING

5
5
5
5
6
7
7
8
8

3

SYSTEM DESIGN
3.1 DESIGN PRINCIPLES
3.2 OVERALL ARCHITECTURE
3.3 FRONTEND, GATEWAY, AND EVENT FLOW
3.4 PLANNER AND DAG EXECUTION
3.5 CONTEXT PAGING
3.6 GLOBAL SCHEDULER AND RESOURCE MANAGER
3.7 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
3.8 TOOL MANAGEMENT

9
9
9
10
11
12
12
13
14

vi
3.9 AGENT LIFECYCLE AND EVENTS
3.10 SANDBOXED CODE RUNNER
3.11 IMPLEMENTED AND PROPOSED BOUNDARIES

15
16
16

4

IMPLEMENTATION
4.1 IMPLEMENTATION ENVIRONMENT
4.2 SEMANTIC AGENT RETRIEVAL
4.3 PLANNER AND FALLBACK
4.4 DAG VALIDATION
4.5 PRIORITY-AGING SCHEDULER
4.6 RESOURCE ADMISSION AND TOKEN BUDGETS
4.7 REDIS EVENTS AND BACKEND FORWARDING
4.8 CONTEXT PAGE-OUT AND PAGE-IN
4.9 SANDBOXED EXECUTION AND SELF-HEALING
4.10 FRONTEND OBSERVABILITY
4.11 AGENTOS ALGORITHMIC SPECIFICATION
4.12 CONFIGURATION AND VERIFICATION

18
18
18
19
19
19
20
21
21
22
22
22
23

5

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

33

6

VERIFICATION EVIDENCE

34

REFERENCES

35

vii

LIST OF TABLES

3.1 Implemented and future AgentOS modules

17

4.1 Principal Redis channels and keys
4.2 Selected AgentOS configuration values

21
23

viii

LIST OF FIGURES

3.1 AgentOS system architecture and the boundary between
implemented and proposed runtime modules
3.2 Frontend, FastAPI gateway, Redis channels, AI kernel,
and agent-workforce flow
3.3 Planner, validation, and dependency-aware execution
flow
3.4 Context page-out, vector-store retrieval, and semantic
page-in flow
3.5 Global agent scheduler, lifecycle events, resource
checks, and runtime feedback
3.6 Resource-manager decision flow supplied for the AgentOS
design
3.7 Tool selection, permission checking, invocation, and
result return
3.8 Agent lifecycle transitions
3.9 Sandboxed Python execution and bounded self-healing
loop
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9

AgentOS structured LLM-based task planner
AgentOS multi-agent sequential executor
AgentOS agent lifecycle management
AgentOS virtual-memory context paging
AgentOS cooperative time-sliced agent execution
AgentOS semantic dependency-aware planning
AgentOS dependency-aware DAG execution
AgentOS priority-aging and cooperative time-slice model
AgentOS global priority-aging cooperative scheduler

10
11
12
12
13
14
15
16
16
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

ix

LIST OF SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS
AI

Artificial Intelligence

API

Application Programming Interface

DAG

Directed Acyclic Graph

FSM

Finite-State Machine

IPC

Inter-Process Communication

LLM

Large Language Model

MCP

Model Context Protocol

MongoDB

Document-oriented database used for task history and
metadata

RAG

Retrieval-Augmented Generation

RBAC

Role-Based Access Control

Redis

In-memory data store used for queues and event transport

UI

User Interface

WebSocket

Bidirectional communication protocol over a persistent
connection

α

Aging factor used in effective-priority calculation

Pmax

Maximum effective priority

Tq

Cooperative dispatch time quantum

1

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

1.1

BACKGROUND

Large-language-model (LLM) applications have progressed from reactive
question-answering interfaces to systems that can plan, call tools, maintain memory,
and delegate work to specialised agents. A useful multi-agent application therefore
needs more than a prompt and a model endpoint. It needs a runtime that can
represent work, enforce dependencies, manage limited provider and execution
resources, preserve useful context, report progress, and recover safely from
failures.
Operating-system concepts provide a useful design analogy. A task
is submitted to a gateway, a planner decomposes it into executable steps, a
scheduler selects runnable agent work, a resource manager performs admission
control, and an event path exposes state transitions. AgentOS applies this analogy
to LLM-powered agents while retaining the uncertainty and latency of model
calls.

1.2

MOTIVATION

In a conventional chatbot, application logic, conversation state, tool
invocation, and error handling are often tightly coupled. This makes it difficult
to run independent work concurrently or to explain why an agent was selected.
Long conversations also exceed the practical context window of a model, while
blindly truncating history can remove information needed by later steps. Finally,
direct code execution or unrestricted tools create safety and observability risks.

2
AgentOS is motivated by the need for a reusable runtime layer. The
project investigates how planning, agent retrieval, DAG execution, semantic
context paging, global scheduling, resource accounting, event streaming, and
sandboxed execution can be composed into one observable system.

1.3

PROBLEM STATEMENT

There is no single lightweight runtime in the project environment
that coordinates heterogeneous agents across multiple concurrent tasks while
enforcing dependencies, observing token and concurrency budgets, preserving
relevant context, and exposing execution state to a user interface. Reimplementing
these facilities inside each application increases duplication, makes failures difficult
to diagnose, and prevents systematic evaluation of scheduling and resource policies.

1.4

OBJECTIVES

The objectives of AgentOS are:

1. to provide a modular AI-kernel-style runtime for specialised agents;
2. to generate structured plans and execute their steps as a validated
DAG;
3. to retrieve suitable agents using semantic capability matching;
4. to page conversational context between an active window and a vector-backed
swap space;
5. to schedule runnable work using priority aging, fairness, and cooperative
dispatch;

3
6. to enforce global and per-task concurrency and token budgets before
execution;
7. to publish lifecycle and execution events through Redis and forward
them to the UI; and
8. to execute generated Python code in a bounded subprocess with a
limited self-healing loop.

1.5

SCOPE

The current phase covers a Next.js frontend, FastAPI gateway, Python
kernel, Redis event transport, MongoDB task persistence, ChromaDB retrieval,
structured planning, DAG validation and Mermaid generation, context paging,
a global in-process scheduler, resource admission, and a sandboxed Python
runner. The scope does not claim complete RBAC, distributed scheduler workers,
forced termination of active LLM calls, automatic coroutine restoration, or a
production-grade hybrid model router. These are documented as future work.

1.6

CONTRIBUTIONS

The project contributions are a unified execution model for heterogeneous
agents, a visible plan graph, a Redis-mediated activity stream, a semantic context
paging mechanism, a priority-aging scheduler with resource admission, and a
bounded code-execution/self-healing path. The implementation also makes a
deliberate distinction between design aspirations and features that are present
and testable in the repository.

1.7

REPORT ORGANIZATION

4
Chapter 2 surveys research and technical systems related to autonomous
agents, memory, planning, scheduling, tool use, security, event transport, and
vector retrieval. Chapter 3 presents the AgentOS architecture and data flows.
Chapter 4 describes the implementation algorithms, storage conventions, events,
and verification evidence. The conclusion records current limitations and future
extensions.

5

CHAPTER 2
LITERATURE SURVEY

2.1

OVERVIEW

This chapter reviews work that informs the design of AgentOS. The
survey combines peer-reviewed or archival research with official technical documentation
for infrastructure components. Each group is considered in terms of its contribution,
limitation for the present project, and the way AgentOS uses or extends the idea.

2.2

AGENT RUNTIMES AND AUTONOMOUS AGENTS

AIOS frames an LLM agent operating system around scheduling,
context management, memory, storage, access control, and tool management
[1]. Its operating-system analogy directly motivates the AgentOS kernel, although
the current AgentOS implementation is smaller and uses a Python/Redis/MongoDB
stack rather than a complete OS abstraction. The broader survey by Wang et
al. classifies LLM-based agents by construction, applications, and evaluation
[2]; it identifies coordination and reliability as open challenges that AgentOS
addresses through explicit events and DAG dependencies.
The LLM-as-an-OS proposal treats models as system resources and
agents as applications [3]. AutoGen demonstrates programmable multi-agent
conversation and human-in-the-loop patterns [4], while LangGraph provides
graph-based orchestration and durable execution concepts [5]. These systems
show the value of explicit state and orchestration, but do not provide the exact
global priority-aging and token-admission policy implemented here.

6
2.3

MEMORY AND CONTEXT MANAGEMENT

MemGPT introduces virtual context management that moves information
between active context and external storage [6]. MemoryOS organises memory
into short-, mid-, and long-term layers and evaluates memory retention for conversational
agents [7]. These works motivate AgentOS context page-out and page-in. AgentOS
uses semantic embeddings in ChromaDB and an active-window policy; it currently
provides a project-level paging mechanism rather than a learned memory hierarchy
or an independently benchmarked memory score.
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) combines generation with a
non-parametric knowledge store [8]. ChromaDB documents collections, embeddings,
and distance-based retrieval [9]. AgentOS uses this pattern both for agent capability
retrieval and for swapped context. The limitation is that retrieval quality depends
on the embedding model and distance configuration; the current implementation
exposes similarity metadata but does not claim domain-wide retrieval benchmarks.

2.4

PLANNING, TOOL USE, AND REFLECTION

ReAct interleaves reasoning and action so that an agent can use external
tools during problem solving [10]. Toolformer studies self-supervised learning
for deciding when and how to call APIs [11]. Generative Agents combine
memory, reflection, and planning for believable behaviour [12]. Reflexion uses
verbal feedback to improve subsequent attempts without updating model weights
[13]. AgentOS adopts structured planning, explicit tool boundaries, persisted
events, and bounded self-healing, but does not train models or claim the autonomous
reflection capabilities of these research systems.
The Transformer architecture remains the dominant basis for modern
LLMs [14]. Its context limitation makes external context management relevant

7
to AgentOS, while the model itself remains an external provider selected by the
planner/runtime.

2.5

SCHEDULING, RESOURCES, AND RELIABILITY

Classical operating-system scheduling shows why priority alone can
starve old work and why aging can improve fairness [15]. Linux cgroups provide
a practical model for resource accounting and isolation [16]. AgentOS adapts
these ideas to agent work: effective priority increases with queue wait, admission
checks global and per-task slots, and token reservations are tracked before dispatch.
Unlike a CPU scheduler, AgentOS cannot forcibly preempt an in-flight remote
LLM request; its quantum is cooperative and checkpoint-based.
The workflow and orchestration literature emphasises explicit dependency
graphs and stateful execution. LangGraph persistence documents checkpointed
graph state [17], while Temporal documents durable workflow execution [18].
AgentOS currently validates and executes a DAG in-process and persists task/event
evidence; automatic continuation of interrupted coroutines remains future work.

2.6

SECURITY AND SANDBOXED EXECUTION

The Model Context Protocol specifies a standard way for AI applications
to connect models with tools and data sources [19]. OWASP’s LLM security
guidance highlights risks including excessive agency, insecure tool use, and
code execution [20]. Python subprocess execution and filesystem scoping are
therefore bounded in the code runner. Firecracker demonstrates the stronger
isolation achievable with microVMs [21]. AgentOS’s current runner limits
duration and output and scopes its working directory, but it is not a substitute
for a hardened kernel or microVM sandbox.

8
2.7

EVENT-DRIVEN INFRASTRUCTURE

Redis documents Pub/Sub as a low-latency message distribution mechanism
[22]. MongoDB provides durable document storage suitable for task history and
metadata [23]. AgentOS uses Redis for transient task/event transport and queue
metadata and MongoDB for durable task records. Redis Pub/Sub alone is not a
durable event log; recovery therefore persists relevant state in Redis hashes and
MongoDB events, with full replay and exactly-once semantics left for future
work.

2.8

RESEARCH GAP AND POSITIONING

The reviewed systems provide strong solutions for individual concerns:
planning, memory, graph orchestration, tool use, security, or workflow durability.
AgentOS’s contribution is an integrated educational/runtime prototype that makes
these concerns observable together in one project. Its distinctive implementation
choices are semantic agent selection, explicit DAG validation, global priority-aging
scheduling, token/concurrency admission, Redis lifecycle events, context paging,
and frontend graph/activity observability. The current phase prioritises a transparent
and testable architecture over claims of production isolation or benchmark leadership.

9

CHAPTER 3
SYSTEM DESIGN

3.1

DESIGN PRINCIPLES

AgentOS is designed as a modular runtime. The gateway handles
external requests, the orchestrator converts a prompt into a structured plan, and
the kernel owns execution concerns. Redis is used for low-latency coordination
and event transport, while MongoDB stores task history. ChromaDB stores
embeddings used for semantic agent retrieval and context swap. The design
keeps the current dependency truth in the DAG executor and treats scheduler
decisions as admission and dispatch decisions.

3.2

OVERALL ARCHITECTURE

Figure 3.1 shows the implemented data-plane components and their
relationships. A user submits a task through the Next.js interface. The FastAPI
gateway creates or retrieves task state and communicates with the kernel. The
planner selects agents and creates steps; the kernel validates and executes those
steps while publishing activity events.

10

Figure 3.1: AgentOS system architecture and the boundary between
implemented and proposed runtime modules

3.3

FRONTEND, GATEWAY, AND EVENT FLOW

The frontend sends task prompts over HTTP and receives live activity
over WebSocket. The backend listener subscribes to the kernel event channel
and forwards events to connected clients. Figure 3.2 shows the separation between
the task submission channel and the kernel event channel. MongoDB persistence
is performed by the kernel/repository layer so the UI can later query task history.

11

Figure 3.2: Frontend, FastAPI gateway, Redis channels, AI kernel, and
agent-workforce flow

3.4

PLANNER AND DAG EXECUTION

The planner retrieves relevant agent descriptions, requests a structured
execution plan, and applies a fallback plan when the provider is unavailable.
Each step includes an identifier, agent name, description, and dependency list.
The validator canonicalises identifiers, rejects unknown dependencies and cycles,
and supplies a sequential fallback only when a plan omits dependencies. The
executor runs only steps whose prerequisites are complete. Figure 3.3 summarises
this path. The frontend uses the same validated plan to generate Mermaid source
and draw the plan graph, ensuring that displayed edges represent dependencies
rather than decorative links.

12

Prompt

Planner

Validate DAG
cycle + dependency checks

Global scheduler
priority aging

Run ready step
then unlock dependants

Response

Figure 3.3: Planner, validation, and dependency-aware execution flow

3.5

CONTEXT PAGING

The context pager keeps a bounded active message window. When
the window is exceeded, older or less relevant messages are embedded and
stored in the ChromaDB swap collection. A later query retrieves semantically
related pages and injects them into the active context. ChromaDB’s cosine space
returns distance; the implementation converts it as s = 1 − d, where d is the
returned cosine distance. Figure 3.4 presents the page-out and page-in flow.
This mechanism reduces active prompt growth but does not guarantee perfect
recall.

Figure 3.4: Context page-out, vector-store retrieval, and semantic page-in
flow

13
3.6

GLOBAL SCHEDULER AND RESOURCE MANAGER

The scheduler maintains ready records and selects work globally
across active tasks. Effective priority is computed from base priority and queue
waiting time, bounded by a maximum. Before dispatch, the resource manager
checks the global slot limit, per-task slot limit, and token budget. The current
defaults are three global execution slots, two slots per task, and a configurable
50,000-token task budget. Dispatch is cooperative: a running remote LLM
request is not forcibly killed. Figure 3.5 shows the decision path.

Figure 3.5: Global agent scheduler, lifecycle events, resource checks, and
runtime feedback

3.7

RESOURCE MANAGEMENT

The resource-manager design in Figure 3.6 expands the admission
point in the scheduler. It separates token-bucket accounting, quota monitoring,
process monitoring, resource checking, and the final decision. In the current

14
implementation, the corresponding resource manager enforces global and per-task
execution slots and a token budget; the policy store, process monitor, and hard
preemption shown in the figure are design extensions.

Figure 3.6: Resource-manager decision flow supplied for the AgentOS
design

3.8

TOOL MANAGEMENT

Figure 3.7 shows the intended tool-manager boundary between an
agent, a tool registry, permission policy, and local or external services. AgentOS
currently exposes bounded tools through the runtime and code runner; a complete
permission store and MCP-compatible tool manager remain proposed components.

15

Figure 3.7: Tool selection, permission checking, invocation, and result
return

3.9

AGENT LIFECYCLE AND EVENTS

An agent step progresses from CREATED to READY, RUNNING,
and COMPLETED. It can move to WAITING when a resource or dependency
is unavailable, or to BLOCKED/FAILED when execution cannot proceed. The
scheduler and runtime publish structured lifecycle events containing task, step,
agent, execution, status, priority, queue wait, and attempt information. Figure 3.8
shows the state model. RBAC, distributed mutex locking, and complete state-machine
enforcement are architectural extensions rather than claims of full implementation
in this phase.

16

WAITING
CREATED

READY
RUNNING

COMPLETED

BLOCKED

FAILED

Figure 3.8: Agent lifecycle transitions

3.10

SANDBOXED CODE RUNNER

The code runner receives generated Python, writes it into a scoped
working directory, and invokes it through an asynchronous subprocess. It bounds
execution time and captured output. A non-zero exit code or traceback is returned
to the coder/tester agent, which may produce a corrected version for at most
three attempts. Output lines can be published as kernel events for live frontend
observation. Figure 3.9 shows this flow. The current isolation is process and
directory scoping; hardened container or microVM isolation is future work.

exit 0
Output

Request

Coder & Tester Agent

subprocess
time + output limits

max 3 retries

Done

traceback
Repair

Figure 3.9: Sandboxed Python execution and bounded self-healing loop

17
3.11

IMPLEMENTED AND PROPOSED BOUNDARIES

Table 3.1 records the design boundary used throughout the report.
Table 3.1: Implemented and future AgentOS modules
Module
Frontend and gateway

Current implementation

Next.js, FastAPI, WebSocket
activity
Planner and DAG
Structured plan, validation,
Mermaid graph
Scheduler
and Priority aging, slots, token
resources
admission
Context paging
ChromaDB semantic swap
and retrieval
Redis and MongoDB
Events, queue metadata, task
history
Code runner
Bounded Python subprocess
and retries
RBAC / capability Architecture documented
policy
Distributed locks / Architecture documented
workers
Hybrid model routing Provider
abstraction
is
partial
Durable
coroutine Interrupted records are
restoration
detected/requeued policy is
partial

Status / limitation
Implemented
Implemented
Implemented;
cooperative only
Implemented
Implemented
Implemented;
not
microVM isolation
Proposed
Future
Future
Future

18

CHAPTER 4
IMPLEMENTATION

4.1

IMPLEMENTATION ENVIRONMENT

The kernel is implemented in Python using asynchronous services.
The backend is FastAPI-based and the frontend is implemented with Next.js
and TypeScript. Redis provides task/event channels and scheduler metadata;
MongoDB stores task records and event history; ChromaDB provides persistent
vector collections for planning and context swap. Provider-specific LLM usage
is treated as optional metadata because some providers do not return reliable
token counts.

4.2

SEMANTIC AGENT RETRIEVAL

Agent descriptions are embedded in a persistent ChromaDB collection.
A task description is used as a query, and the top candidate records are returned
with their distances and metadata. In the configured cosine space, ChromaDB
returns d = 1 − cos(θ), so the implementation reports s = 1 − d. It does not
divide by two; that transformation would be appropriate for a different distance
normalisation. An LRU cache reduces repeated retrieval for identical descriptions.
Algorithm 4.1 Semantic Agent Retrieval
Require: task description q, agent collection C, result count k
1: r ← C.query(q, k)
2: for all candidate distances di in r do
3:
si ← 1 − d i
4:
attach (agenti , si , descriptioni ) to candidate
5: end for
6: sort candidates by si descending
7: return top candidates

19
4.3

PLANNER AND FALLBACK

The planner asks the configured LLM for a structured execution plan.
The response is parsed into steps and normalised against the agent registry. If the
LLM request fails, exceeds quota, or produces invalid structure, a deterministic
fallback creates a usable plan from the best retrieved agent(s). This maintains
task execution and observability without pretending that the fallback has the
same reasoning quality as the provider.

4.4

DAG VALIDATION

Every step has a unique identifier and a list of prerequisite identifiers.
Validation rejects duplicate identifiers, unknown agents, unknown dependencies,
and cycles. A Kahn-style topological pass counts nodes removed from the ready
set. If the count is smaller than the number of steps, the dependency graph
contains a cycle and is rejected. The same validated dependency lists are used
to generate Mermaid edges.
Algorithm 4.2 Dependency Validation by Cycle Detection
Require: step set S
1: build adjacency list and indegree for every step
2: Q ← all steps with indegree zero
3: visited ← 0
4: while Q is not empty do
5:
remove a step u from Q; visited ← visited + 1
6:
for all successors v of u do
7:
decrement indegree(v)
8:
if indegree(v) = 0 then add v to Q
9:
end if
10:
end for
11: end while
12: if visited ̸= |S| then return invalid cyclic plan
13: elsereturn valid plan
14: end if

20
4.5

PRIORITY-AGING SCHEDULER

The scheduler stores ready records in a Redis sorted set and keeps
execution metadata in hashes. The selection score is conceptually computed as:
Pe f f ective = min(Pbase + αW, Pmax ),

(4.1)

where W is queue waiting time. The implementation uses an in-process pending
set for dispatch coordination and persists the record so that ready and waiting
work is visible and recoverable. A selected record is marked RUNNING, dispatched
once, and then completed, requeued, or failed according to the result.
Algorithm 4.3 Global Priority-Aging Cooperative Scheduler
1: while scheduler is active do
2:
receive and persist READY records
3:
if ready queue is empty then wait for event; continue
4:
end if
5:
for all ready records ai do calculate Pe f f ective,i using Equation 4.1
6:
end for
7:
a∗ ← arg max Pe f f ective,i
8:
if resource manager denies a∗ temporarily then mark WAITING and
requeue
9:
else if resource manager denies permanently then mark FAILED and
publish event
10:
elsedispatch a∗ cooperatively and publish RUNNING
11:
if execution completes then publish COMPLETED
12:
else if execution waits or is requeued then publish WAITING or
PREEMPTED
13:
elsepublish FAILED
14:
end if
15:
end if
16:
release resource reservations and record metrics
17: end while

4.6

RESOURCE ADMISSION AND TOKEN BUDGETS

The resource manager checks active global slots, active slots for the

21
task, and the cumulative estimated token reservation for the task. A temporary
denial leaves work waiting; an exhausted task budget is converted into a blocked/failed
outcome rather than leaving the task silently pending. Actual provider usage,
when available, is recorded separately from estimated admission tokens. This
distinction explains why a provider such as Groq may display zero usage metadata
even while the scheduler correctly enforces its configured estimate.

4.7

REDIS EVENTS AND BACKEND FORWARDING

Events are JSON records containing task identifier, step identifier,
agent name, execution identifier, status, timestamp, priority, effective priority,
queue wait, and attempt. The kernel publishes them on kernel events; the
backend subscribes and forwards them over WebSocket. Scheduler records use
keys such as agentos:scheduler:ready and agentos:scheduler:job:<execution id>.
MongoDB persists task history and event records for later inspection.
Table 4.1: Principal Redis channels and keys
Name

Purpose

New
task/submission
messages
kernel events
Lifecycle, scheduler, and
execution events
agentos:scheduler:ready
Ready queue sorted-set
metadata
agentos:scheduler:job:<id>
Per-execution state hash
agentos:task:<id> Task-level scheduler state

backend tasks

4.8

Durability role
Transport
Transport plus Mongo
persistence
Recovery aid
Recovery aid
Inspection/recovery

CONTEXT PAGE-OUT AND PAGE-IN

The pager moves messages from the active conversation state to a
persistent ChromaDB collection after a configured window is exceeded. Each

22
page stores message content, task metadata, and an embedding. On a later turn,
the current query is embedded and the collection is searched; selected messages
are reintroduced in relevance order. The implementation emits page-out and
page-in metrics, allowing the UI or logs to verify that paging occurred.

4.9

SANDBOXED EXECUTION AND SELF-HEALING

The code runner creates a scoped temporary script, launches it with
asyncio.create subprocess exec, captures stdout/stderr, and terminates the
subprocess after a strict timeout. Output size is limited to prevent unbounded
memory use. On a traceback, the error is supplied to the coder/tester agent and a
revised script is attempted, up to three times. The runner publishes line-oriented
output and final status as kernel events. No claim is made that an ordinary
subprocess is equivalent to a container or microVM security boundary.

4.10

FRONTEND OBSERVABILITY

The task activity panel displays lifecycle events, scheduler state, queue
position, effective priority, waiting time, attempt number, resource decisions,
and token totals when provider metadata is present. The plan graph modal
displays the structured graph and Mermaid source. Token fields distinguish
input, output, total, and configured budget; when the provider omits usage, the
interface reports that the metadata is unavailable rather than inventing a count.

4.11

AGENTOS ALGORITHMIC SPECIFICATION

The following algorithm sheets define the AgentOS execution design.
Together they specify the relationship between the planner, executor, lifecycle
manager, context pager, dependency-aware DAG executor, scheduler, and priority-aging

23
model. They complement the executable implementation described above. The
sheets that describe full execution-context restoration, hard time-slice suspension,
permission stores, or preemption represent planned extensions where the current
implementation remains cooperative or partial.

4.12

CONFIGURATION AND VERIFICATION

Table 4.2 lists the important policy values. Verification for this phase
consists of Python compilation, TypeScript type checking, scheduler/resource
smoke tests, DAG validation checks, and manual event/graph inspection. No
throughput, latency, or model-quality benchmark is claimed because a controlled
benchmark dataset and repeated measurement harness are not yet part of the
repository.
Table 4.2: Selected AgentOS configuration values
Configuration

Default

Role

Global execution slots

3

Per-task execution slots
Task token budget

2
50,000

Maximum
simultaneously
admitted jobs
Fairness/isolation across tasks
Cumulative
estimated
admission limit
Upper bound for aging

Maximum
scheduler configurable
priority
Context active window
configurable
Self-healing attempts
3

Number of active messages
Maximum code repair retries

24

Figure 4.1: AgentOS structured LLM-based task planner

25

Figure 4.2: AgentOS multi-agent sequential executor

26

Figure 4.3: AgentOS agent lifecycle management

27

Figure 4.4: AgentOS virtual-memory context paging

28

Figure 4.5: AgentOS cooperative time-sliced agent execution

29

Figure 4.6: AgentOS semantic dependency-aware planning

30

Figure 4.7: AgentOS dependency-aware DAG execution

31

Figure 4.8: AgentOS priority-aging and cooperative time-slice model

32

Figure 4.9: AgentOS global priority-aging cooperative scheduler

33

CHAPTER 5
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

AgentOS establishes a modular runtime for multi-agent applications
in which planning, semantic agent selection, DAG execution, context management,
scheduling, resource admission, sandboxed code execution, and frontend observability
are treated as shared system services. The current implementation provides a
concrete bridge between the project architecture and a working repository: tasks
enter through a gateway, plans are validated, runnable steps are scheduled, Redis
carries lifecycle events, MongoDB preserves task history, ChromaDB supports
semantic retrieval, and the frontend exposes both the plan graph and execution
activity.
The implementation is intentionally transparent about its boundaries.
Scheduler dispatch is cooperative, token usage can be unavailable when a provider
omits metadata, and restart recovery identifies interrupted work without restoring
every active coroutine. Complete RBAC, distributed locks, hardened microVM
isolation, durable workflow continuation, and formal performance evaluation
remain outside the completed phase.
Future work will therefore focus on durable restart resumption, true
checkpoints inside long-running agents, complete capability enforcement, distributed
scheduler workers, a hybrid local/cloud model router, cost-aware scheduling,
formal workload benchmarks, and additional autonomous event triggers. These
extensions can be added without changing the central separation between planner,
scheduler, runtime, persistence, and observability layers.

34

CHAPTER 6
VERIFICATION EVIDENCE

The current phase was checked with repository-level validation rather
than performance claims. Python modules in the kernel and backend were
compiled with python -m compileall -q. The frontend was checked with
the TypeScript compiler using npx tsc --noEmit --incremental false. Focused
smoke tests exercised scheduler admission, resource release, priority aging,
DAG validation, and event payload creation. Manual inspection verified that
Mermaid source contains dependency edges when the plan supplies dependencies
and that the activity interface receives kernel events.
The evidence establishes build and integration readiness for the present
phase. It does not establish production security, exact-once distributed execution,
provider-independent token accounting, or comparative model quality. Those
claims require controlled experiments and are reserved for future evaluation.

35

REFERENCES

[1] Kai Mei et al. Aios: Llm agent operating system.
arXiv:2403.16971, 2024.

arXiv preprint

[2] Lei Wang et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous
agents. Frontiers of Computer Science, 18(6), 2024.
[3] Zhihan Liu et al. Llm+ p: Empowering large language models with optimal
planning proficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.03815, 2023.
[4] Qingyun Wu et al. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.08155, 2023.
[5] LangChain. Langgraph documentation, 2026. Accessed October 2026.
[6] Charles Packer et al. Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.08560, 2023.
[7] Jiazheng Kang et al. Memory os of ai agent. In Proceedings of the 2025
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
25264–25286, 2025.
[8] Patrick Lewis et al.
Retrieval-augmented generation for
knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 33, 2020.
[9] Chroma. Chroma documentation: Collections and configuration, 2026.
Accessed October 2026.
[10] Shunyu Yao et al. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language
models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
[11] Timo Schick et al. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves
to use tools. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 36, 2023.
[12] Joon Sung Park et al. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human
behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology, 2023.
[13] Noah Shinn et al. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement
learning.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 36, 2023.
[14] Ashish Vaswani et al. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, volume 30, 2017.

36
[15] Abraham Silberschatz, Peter Baer Galvin, and Greg Gagne. Operating
System Concepts. Wiley, 10 edition, 2018.
[16] Linux Kernel Documentation. Control group v2, 2026. Accessed October
2026.
[17] LangChain. Langgraph persistence and checkpointing, 2026. Accessed
October 2026.
[18] Temporal Technologies. Temporal documentation: Durable execution,
2026. Accessed October 2026.
[19] Model Context Protocol.
Accessed October 2026.

Model context protocol specification, 2026.

[20] OWASP Foundation. Owasp top 10 for large language model applications,
2025. Accessed October 2026.
[21] Amazon Web Services.
Accessed October 2026.

Firecracker microvm documentation, 2026.

[22] Redis Ltd. Redis pub/sub documentation, 2026. Accessed October 2026.
[23] MongoDB Inc. Mongodb documentation, 2026. Accessed October 2026.

